---
title: "Learn Mutiple Programming Languages"
layout: "post"
date: 2015-02-06 17:27:00 -8
author: "JT"
tags: "Programming, Learning, Lanageages"
featureImage: "learn-mutiple-programming-languages.jpg"
---
I have learned many programming languages over the 28 years I have been programming here is a few in no particular order: Basic, C, C++, Java, C#, VB.Net, VBScript, Python, Ruby, JavaScript, SQL, Objective-C, Perl, Pascal, and this year I plan on learning Erlang and Elixir. I couldn't write an application in most of them today but I have read at least one book or worked through many tutorials online. As you can see, I love learning and I love programming with a huge passion. I tell you this because I wanted to talk about why I have chosen to learn so many different programming languages and how it has help me. I hope in turn I can inspire and help you to learn as well.

One of the best reasons to learn different languages is that different languages solve problems in different ways. It is easier to take our primary language at the time and solve all our problems with it. I think most programmers can do this after using a language for a year or so. A DBA tends to solve problems with SQL and a .Net programmer solves problems with C#. Doing it this way works but you might just be missing out on an easier way to solve that problem. Sometimes you will learn the new way to solve the problem and bring it back to one of your primary languages. Sometimes you will get this calling and end up switching to that language. If you never learned it in the first place you are never going to know what you are missing out on.

Another great reason to learn multiple languages is you find out quickly that there really is know right way to solve any problem. This can be very hard for some people. We are taught, at least in american schools, that there is always a right and wrong answer. This isn't true in the real world for many different things. Learning multiple languages shows us the many different ways to solve a problem in programming. Some ways might be slower but easier to maintain later. Some might get the job done fast but as the project gets bigger it gets harder and harder to maintain. In the end though there is never a right answer. There are only trade offs. It's up to us to decide which ones we want to take and learning different languages makes this easier and easier as your career grows.

It isn't about just learning a few languages ether. You should try picking a language that is structured differently. If you know C# learning Java isn't going to get you as much value as learning F#. See Java and C# are single inheritance object orientated languages. The solve many problems with the same patterns. But if you were to learn F# or Haskell well now you are learning a functional language. Which is a very different way of solving problems. This was the one reason why I stuck with JavaScript vs Ruby. I was learning both in 2009 but I stopped learning Ruby because although it was a dynamic languges and far more popular at the time. It was still a traditional object orientated language. JavaScript wasn't, it has prototypical inheritance. Also at the time Node.JS was picking up and though I had used an event emitter before, I was interested in exploring new ways of solving problems in that way.

So I got you motivated to learn a new language now but you don't know which one to learn next
